# ds1_final_project

## The Effects of Temperature on Electric Vehicle Charging Across Time and Vehicle Model


# Abstract
This project will conduct a statistical analysis to model the effects of temperature on charging an electric vehicle and how these effects have changed over time. This research will make use of public electric vehicle charging session data from the City of Burlington’s twenty-five commercial public Level 2 charging stations (240V/32A) and two 25-kW Direct Current Fast Chargers (DCFC). The first charging stations were installed in 2013 providing us with charging data continuing into the present. This information will allow us to develop an analysis that demonstrates any improvements in battery technology over the past six years that can additionally address cold-weather electric vehicle charging.

# Overview and Motivation of Research Questions
Achieving sustainable transportation to combat climate change and address energy security has become a focus of many regions around the world. Electric vehicles provide a solution for decreasing point-source greenhouse gases while enabling regions to provide secure, renewable, and hyperlocal sources of energy. Due to its geographic nature and environmental focus, Vermont imports 100% of the oil and gas used to fuel its transportation sector. This sector accounts for 44% of Vermont's total energy needs and results in approximately 53% of GHG emissions, costing Vermonters over $1.1 billion annually at the gas station and an additional $313 million in incremental annual healthcare costs (Energy Action Network 2018). To overcome the dependence on oil in this sector, the state and electric utilities have begun providing incentives to increase investment in electric vehicles and charging infrastructure.
As the number of EVs increases in the future, so too will the demand for electricity on the power grid to charge these batteries. Studies have found that the energy required to charge a single EV can cause a household’s monthly electricity usage to increase by 50% (Brouwer 2013). This raises important questions that require modeling of electric vehicle charging demand to enable a sustainable future.
Better understanding electric vehicle charging processes, potential charging efficiency, and how other factors (like the weather) affect charging will not only help to inform grid planning, but also help increase public awareness about the charging process. This information can prove to be vitally informative to the majority of people who have never owned an electric vehicle who might find the whole process more confusing than anything. There has also been research related to how cold weather affects certain types of electric batteries (Motoaki et al. 2018) that focused on 2012 Nissan Leafs, as well as ongoing research investigating the performance of lithium-ion batteries in cold climates (Jaguemont et al. 2016). However, there is limited empirical research, as stated by these papers, that has explored the impact of temperature over time and across different electric vehicle models.
We are interested in how cold weather and additional factors affect charging times of different types of electric vehicles and if improvements in lithium-ion battery technology have addressed these effects. There is also research (Yuksel and Michalek 2015) on how regional temperatures affect the efficiency, range, and emissions of electric batteries. They noted that the ideal conditions for the most efficient battery life are in climates similar to those in the Pacific Northwest/West Coast (mild temperatures for much of the year) when compared to ‘extreme climates where the daily temperature might get very hot or very cold. It will be interesting to see how a harsh winter climate, such as Burlington, Vermont’s compares to the findings in these papers. 
The motivation of this research is twofold. The first is to better understand the impact of cold weather and other factors that could better inform prospective EV buyers in cold climates. The second interest seeks to potentially solve a more difficult question: Does the City of Burlington have a sufficient charging infrastructure provided for both winter and summer months to meet future electric vehicle charging needs.
